Add support for extension slots (#375)
mapping-commons/sssom: src/docs/spec-model.md

* any relation from the [Relation Ontology (RO)](https://obofoundry.org/ontology/ro.html);
* any relation under [skos:mappingRelation](http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#mappingRelation) in the [Semantic Mapping Vocabulary](https://mapping-commons.github.io/semantic-mapping-vocabulary/).

## Non-standard slots

<a id="non-standard-slots"></a>

> Implementations are only REQUIRED to support the standard metadata slots defined in the LinkML model.

Reviewer: > defined in the SSSOM LinkML schema

So to not cause confusion that we re talking about the sssom schema here (rather than the LinkML meta-schema)

Author: I wonder how could someone interpret “the LinkML model” in this context as referring to anything else than “the model defined by the LinkML schema we are talking about since the beginning of this document”, but fine, if you believe there is a possible ambiguity here, happy to clear it out.

Reviewer: Thanks for accomodating, this was my impression on my first read.

Once defined, an extension slot may be used as a supplementary slot in either the `Mapping` class or the `MappingSet` class (or both), as if it was a normal, standard slot. How those slots are represented internally and provided to client code is left at the discretion of the implementations.

### Undefined extensions

Undefined extensions are non-standard slots that are not explicitly defined as described in the previous section. Implementations MAY support undefined extensions.

Upon encountering a non-standard slot that is not a defined extension, an implementation that supports undefined extensions MUST behave as if the slot had been defined with:

* a `property` constructed by catenating the prefix `http://sssom.invalid/` to the name of the slot;
* a `type_hint` of `http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#string`.

### Restrictions on the values of extension slots

#### General restrictions

The following restrictions apply to all extension slots, regardless of whether they are defined or undefined.

Each mapping set and each mapping can have at most _one_ value for each extension slot. The expected behaviour upon encountering a repeated extension slot is unspecified.

> All extension values MUST be representable as literal strings. Complex data structures (e.g., lists or dictionaries) MUST NOT be used.

Reviewer: Note: _all_ data structures can be represented as a literal string, so not sure if this sentence will do anything. I can have an extension slot, type it as xsd:string, and shove a 10 GB XML document in there if I so want to..

Another way to put it probably is to say that the expected type should be a simple, primitive type, and not a complex, composite type (like list or dict or some such).

Author: > Another way to put it probably is to say that the expected type should be a simple, primitive type, and not a complex, composite type (like list or dict or some such).

Agreed.

> I can have an extension slot, type it as xsd:string, and shove a 10 GB XML document in there if I so want to..

Note that as long as it is encoded as a string (as in `my_extension_slot: '<?xml version="1.0"?><article xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook/">...</article>'), that shouldn’t be a problem at all.

Reviewer: Your new docs look perfect.

Extensions are defined in the `extension_definition` slot of the `MappingSet` object. Each definition is comprised of three elements:

* the name of the slot, as it will appear when used in a mapping set (`slot_name`);
* a property intended to specify the meaning of the slot (`property`);
* the type of values expected by the slot (`type_hint`).

A definition MUST have at least a `slot_name`. The name MUST be a XML “non-colonized name” (“NCName”, see [Namespaces in XML, §2](https://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xml-names-19990114/#NT-NCName)). The name MUST NOT match the name of an existing standard slot.

To avoid any conflicy with a future version of the SSSOM specification (which could introduce new standard slot names), implementations are strongly encouraged to craft extension slot names that start with the `ext_` prefix. No new standard slot with a name starting with `ext_` will ever be introduced in any future version of the standard. (This is an advice for SSSOM producers only; SSSOM consumers MUST NOT reject an extension slot solely on the basis that its name does not start with `ext`.)

> A definition SHOULD have a `property`. If it does not, implementations MUST automatically construct a default property by catenating the prefix `http://sssom.invalid/` with the name of the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A definition SHOULD have a `property`. If it does not, implementations MUST automatically construct a default property by concatenating the prefix `http://sssom.ext/` with the name of the extension.
```

Why invalid?

Author: Because that’s an officially recognised top-level domain specifically intended for this kind of purposes ([RFC 2606](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2606)), one that is guaranteed never to resolve to anything ([RFC 6761](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6761)).

Reviewer: Awesome! Didnt know that, and its fine by me then.

> The slot name and the property MUST be unique to each definition. No two definitions can share the same name and/or the same property.

Reviewer: > No two definitions can share the same name and/or the same property.

Why property? Typical example:

- nico_comment
- damien_comment
- harshad_comment

all have the rdfs:comment property?

Reviewer: (As an aside, while I think this part of the definition should be dropped, there is a bit of a risk that the property slot in the extensions clashes with the "meaning" or "slot_uri" values in the regular sssom slots.

Author: > Why property? Typical example:
>
>    nico_comment
>    damien_comment
>    harshad_comment
>
> all have the rdfs:comment property?

No! The _property_, not the *slot_name*, is what identifies the extension value. That’s why it is strongly recommended that every extension definition has a _property_, and why implementations MUST construct one automatically if needed. The slot name is merely how the extension is referred to in the SSSOM/TSV format.

You’re the one who insisted on that because it was critical for you that extension values could be serialised into RDF, which required them to have a proper IRI instead of merely a name. How would you serialise your “typical example” in RDF if your three extension slots all have the same `rdfs:comment` property???

Reviewer: Ok I dont remember all the details on this discussion, I apologise. I was happy with our final draft so I wont change my mind now!

A definition MAY have a `type_hint`. If it does not, a default type of `http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#string` is assumed.

Once defined, an extension slot may be used as a supplementary slot in either the `Mapping` class or the `MappingSet` class (or both), as if it was a normal, standard slot. How those slots are represented internally and provided to client code is left at the discretion of the implementations.

### Undefined extensions

Undefined extensions are non-standard slots that are not explicitly defined as described in the previous section. Implementations MAY support undefined extensions.

Upon encountering a non-standard slot that is not a defined extension, an implementation that supports undefined extensions MUST behave as if the slot had been defined with:

> * a `property` constructed by catenating the prefix `http://sssom.invalid/` to the name of the slot;

Reviewer: If you correct the above (i dont like "invalid" at all here, something more neutral would be preferable), remember to correct it hear as well
